A. Penetrating injuries:
·
Low velocity injuries: These are caused by
o Knives, spikes of glass, and other sharp objects.
Bullets that are fired by pistols travel at a slow velocity and are, therefore,
included in this group. The injury is usually focused over a small area.
■ High velocity injuries: The common exampleis firearm injuries that are caused by rifles. Here the energy may be dissipated over a wide area. Shock waves spread out from the main missile tract and affect areas far from the primary missile tract. The higherthe velocity of the missile, the more is the damage it causes (chapter 1).
B. Blunt injuries:
■ Direct blows
Fall from a height
■Road traffic accidents (RTA)
When a pedestrian is struck by a moving vehicle, there is often an acceleration injury in addition to the direct trauma at the site of impact. A person inside a moving car acquiresthe same velocity of the car. If the car stops suddenly, the person will continue moving forwards and if he is
seat belt injuries
not wearing the seat belt, the head will strike Fig. 2.1: The seat belt mark. Suspect against the car. The force of impact of the body against the seat belt may itself cause fracture of the clavicle, damage to the small intestine, the mesentery, stomach or duodenum, the so-called seat belt injuries. The skin mark of the seat belt should raise suspicion of such injuries (Fig. 2.1). It should be noted, however, that the protective benefits of a seat belt far exceed its possible injurious effect.
With blunt trauma there is a tendency for certain patterns of associated injuries, e.g., a combination of head and cervical injuries, sternal and dorsal spine injuries, fracture of the lower ribs and rupture of the liver or spleen, and pelvic fracture with bladder or urethral injuries.



2.3 Causes of trauma mortality
Deaths following trauma can be classified into 3 groups according to the timing
after the accident.
A. Immediate deaths:
These follow fatal injuries and occur within few minutes after the accident so that little can be done for the victims. Examples of these injuries include major trauma to the brain or upper spinal cord, injuries of the heart or major blood vessels or rupture of the major airway.
B. Early deaths:
These occur within few hours after the accident and so, with proper and rapid management, the patients have a chance of survival. These cases include intracranial haemorrhage, massive intra-abdominal or intrathoracic haemorrhage, or major fractures.
C. Late deaths:
These occur some weeks after the injury, generally due to sepsis or multiple organ failure. Organized systems for trauma care are focused on saving a trauma victim from early mortality, while critical care is designed to prevent late trauma mortality.
2.4 Organized trauma care
Victims of major trauma are best treated by a well-organized and trained trauma team. Accident and emergency departments should have an equipped resuscitation area set aside to receive major trauma victims.
In mass casualty accidents, e.g., train accidents or earthquakes, the concept of triage is important. Triage means sorting of patients, i.e., their ranking according to both




Chapter 3: Fluid, Electrolyte and Acid-base Regulation their clinical need and the available resources to provide treatment. It may take two forms:
o If the number of casualties does not exceed the facilities, all critically injured are
treated.
o If the number of casualties exceeds facilities, then the critically injured most likely to survive are treated first.
The American College of Surgeons developed the Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) which is an internationally accepted protocol for the management of major trauma victims. ATLS protocol has three elements
o Primary survey resuscitation.
Secondary survey.
o Definitive treatment of individual
injuries. This will be discussed in the
corresponding chapters.
ATLS
1. Primary survey/resuscitation. 2. Secondary survey.
3. Definitive treatment.
Airway obstruction may kill the trauma victim within minutes. Its relief should receive top priority.
The primary survey and resuscitation should start at the site of accident by trained ambulance personnel. It continues as the trauma victim reaches the hospital.
2.5 Primary resuscitation
survey with
simultaneous
The objective: is to identify and treat any immediately life-threatening condition.
Steps: In sequence the five steps of the primary survey are A, B, C, D, and E.
A.
Airway with restriction of cervical spine motion.
B.
Breathing and ventilation.
C.
Circulation with hemorrhage control.
D. Disability (brief neurological assessment).
E. Exposure and Environment.
Life-threatening problems discovered during the primary survey are always dealt with
before proceeding to the secondary survey.






Chapter 3: Fluid, Electrolyte and Acid-base Regulation
A. Airway (and cervical spine control):
The patient's airway is evaluated and protected if necessary, while concomitantly controlling movement of the cervical spine. In general, if the patient is capable of unstrained speech, his airway is patent. All patients receive supplemental oxygen by high flow non- rebreathing mask upon arrival.
■ Clear the airway:
Identify facial fractures. Vomit, blood or foreign material should be removedmanually (finger
sweep) or with a rigid suction device.
This is followed by chin lift or jaw thrust (Fig. 2.2).
Protect the airway:
о
An oropharyngeal or nasopharyngeal airway tube
Fig. 2.2: Clear the airway: ■Finger sweep
■ Chin lift ■ Jaw thrust
prevents the tongue from falling back and occluding the airway in an unconscious person.
If the patient is able to communicate verbally, the airway is not likely to be in immediate jeopardy.
Definitive airway (cuffed secured tube in the trachea) is indicated with:
Apnoea
Glasgow coma scale of 8 or lower
O
о
Risk of aspiration
о
о
0 0
Impending or actual airway compromise (inhalation injuries, maxillofacial trauma)
Closed head injuries (allow hyperventilation to decrease intracranial pressure (ICP))
Orotracheal intubation allows the use of a large tube.
Nasotracheal intubation is safer if the cervical spine appears fractured.






Chapter 3: Fluid, Electrolyte and Acid-base Regulation
Cricothyroidotomy (Fig. 2.3): This is
done either by making a cut and inserting a
tube, or by the percutaneous insertion of a wide-bore needle. This procedure is not
suitable for children.
N.B. Tracheostomy is rarely needed in the emergency room management.
■ Cervical spine control:
Fig. 2.3: Cricothyroidotomy
The cervical spine should be considered unstable (pending radiological diagnosis) in the
following situations:
Clinical examination reveals bony abnormalities or cervical tenderness. Multisystem trauma, a blunt injury above the clavicle, or an altered level of consciousness from trauma or from drug/alcohol intake.
Maxillofacial trauma.
Stiff neck collar
Adhesive tape across
forehead to trolley
Trolley
Sandbag by side of head
Cervical spine immobilization is done
using a backboard and a rigid collar. If a collar is not available, manual in-line immobilization is necessary (Fig. 2.4). Radiological evaluation is done later after stabilization of vital systems. At least three views of the cervical spine (lateral, AP, and odontoid) are done.
Fig. 2.4: Cervical spine immobilization






Chapter 3: Fluid, Electrolyte and Acid-base Regulation
B.
Breathing:
Assessment:
■ Inspection for air movement, respiratory rate, cyanosis, tracheal shift, jugular venous distention, open chest wounds, asymmetric chest expansion and use of accessory muscles of respiration.
Palpation for subcutaneous emphysema and flail segments.
▪ Auscultation for upper airway sounds (stridor, wheezing, or gurgling) and for lower airway sounds present over lung fields.
■ Percussion for hyperresonance or dullness over either lung field.
000000
Fig. 2.5: An intercostal chest tube isused to drain air or fluid from the pleural cavity. The tube is connected to an under- water seal
The immediately 5 life threatening thoracic conditions and their treatment are:
a. Tension pneumothorax: Needle
decompression followed later by intercostal
chest tube (Fig. 2.5).
b. Tracheobronchial tree injury: Immediate placement of definitive airway.
C. Massive haemothorax: Initial treatment is by chest tube insertion to allow lung expansion. Later thoracotomy may be needed if bleeding continues.
d. Open pneumothorax: Initial treatment is by
an occlusive dressing fixed at 3 sides only followed by insertion of a chest tube.
Fig 2.6: Pericardiocentesis for aspiration of blood from the pericardium. The needle is inserted
to the left of xiphoid and is directed to the tip of left scapula.
e. Cardiac tamponade (not a breathing but a circulatory problem): Needle pericardiocentesis (Fig. 2.6) followed later by operative pericardiotomy and control of source of bleeding.










Chapter 3: Fluid, Electrolyte and Acid-base Regulation
C.
Shock
Circulation:
a. Haemorrhagic shock: Commonest. Tension pneumothorax reduces venous
return and worsens this shock.
b. Cardiogenic shock: Tamponade and myocardial trauma.
C. Neurogenic shock: Spinal cord injury.
Action
a. Bleeding is controlled with direct pressure if possible. Sites of hidden haemorrhage
are intra-abdominal, intra-thoracic, and fractures of pelvis and femur.
b. Two large-calibre (minimum 18 gauge) peripheral IV lines are inserted. A central line may also be added.
C. Blood samples are sent for typing, cross-matching, haemoglobin, haematocrit and blood chemistry.
d. One litre Ringer's lactate solution is infused as a start for adults, and 20ml/kg for
pediatric patients.
e. When cross-matched blood is available, it is to be infused in cases with minimal or no response to IV fluids. IV fluids and blood are given at a rate that ensures an optimum urine output of 0.5-1 ml/kg/hour for adults.
D. Disability: (brief neurological assessment)
causes of neurological deficits related to trauma are:
Common
■ Head injury
• Нурохіа
■ Shock
Alcohol or drugs abuse
AVPU evaluation:
Based on patient's best response.
A→ Alert and interactive
v→ Vocal stimuli elicit a response
P→ Painful stimuli are necessary to evoke a response
U→ Unresponsive
Management priorities in
major trauma cases are
Breathing,
Airway, Circulation, Disability, and
Exposure

gulation
This provides only brief neurological information. A more detailed assessment using the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) is performed during the secondary survey.
E. Exposure and environment:
Clothes: All clothes of the trauma victim are removed using sharp large scissors.
Warmth: Keep the emergency room warm and use blankets to prevent hypothermia. ■ Urethral catheter (Foley's) to monitor urine output. Adjuncts to the primary survey
This is contraindicated if there is blood at the urethral
meatus as it indicates urethral injury. Trial of a catheter insertion in this case is usually unsuccessful and may even compound the injury.
Nasogastric tube (Ryle's) decompresses the stomach and prevents vomiting and aspiration.
ECG monitoring
Pulse oximetry and arterial blood gases (ABGs)
Radiological assessment during primary survey:
For blunt trauma: FAST ultrasound, cervical spine (Fig. 2.7), AP chest (Fig. 2.8) and AP pelvis (Fig. 2.9) X-rays are mandatory.
Fig. 2.7: Cervical spine X-ray shows fracture dislocation between C5 and C6.
Fig. 2.8: Chest X-ray of a major trauma victim shows a widened mediastinum which denotes aortic rupture
Fig. 2.9: X-ray of the pelvis shows an unstable fracture of the pelvis, which is likely to be accompanied by bladder or posterior urethral injury
For penetrating trauma: AP chest and X-ray of trauma site, if applicable.
■ After resuscitation: other X-rays or CT scans (Fig.2.10) are performed as indicated.
History:
The patient's history should be obtained while completing the primary survey. If the patient is unconscious, the rescue team, accident witnesses, and family members should


be relied upon to get the following information that have the acronym AMPLE.
A → Allergies
M→ Medications
P→ Past medical history
L→ Last meal (time)
E→ Events of injury.
N.B. Consider the need for patient transfer: It is important not to delay transfer to perform an in-depth diagnostic evaluation. Only undertake testing that enhances ability to resuscitate, stabilize and ensure safe transfer.
2.6 Secondary survey
The secondary survey is to be done once resuscitation efforts are under way and preliminary X-rays have been evaluated.
Objectives:
A. Examination of the patient from head to toe and front to back.
B. Taking a complete medical history.
C. Integration of all clinical, laboratory, and radiological information. D. Formulation of a management plan. It includes examination of:
-
Head: Haematoma, fractures and pupils.
Face
Spine: To allow examination of the back, the patient's body is turned in one piece (log rolling) by four persons. This is to avoid injury of the spinal cord if there is an unstable spine fracture.
■ Neck
Chest
Abdomen: For indications of abdominal exploration see chapter 40. CT (Fig 2.10) or diagnostic peritoneal lavage (DPL) are indicated in blunt abdominal trauma, in an adult, that is associated with:
o Suspicion of organ injury with equivocal signs.


o Unreliable abdominal examination because patient is unconscious, e.g., head trauma, or drug or alcohol intoxication.
o Unexplained hypotension that may be caused by blood loss. The technique, interpretation and limitations of DPL are discussed in chapter 40.
Perineum, including rectal examination in all patients and vaginal examination in females.
Limbs for fractures and for soft tissue injuries including vessels, nerves, and tendons,
■Nervous system
o Pupils for size, equality, and reaction to light.
o Glasgow Coma Scale (see chapter 19).
o Cranial nerves.
o Sensation and motor activity in limbs.
o CT scan of head if there is suspicion of intra-cranial injuries (Fig. 2.11).
Fig. 2.10: shows a tear in the spleen.
Fig. 2.11: CT scan of head shows an
In CT scan of abdomen
At abdominal exploration extradural haematoma
2.7 Definitive treatment of individual injuries
This will depend upon the type of injury and will be discussed in the relevant chapters. During this phase the following should be noted:
A. Some cases may require transfer either to another hospital with specialized facilities, or to another department in the same hospital.


20.3 Maxillofacial Injuries
Maxillofacial injuries are frequent with road traffic accidents, fights, and contact sports. In treatment of patients with extensive maxillofacial injuries, the order of priorities is consistent:
1) Patent airway. The patient may have obstruction of the upper airway due to blood, dentures or vomitus. The usual measures to keep a patent airway are followed (chapter 2). Tracheostomy is rarely indicated.
2) Effective breathing.
3) Control of haemorrhage by direct pressure or ligation of the bleeding vessels. If the patient is shocked suspect associated abdominal or chest injuries. Remember that isolated facial injuries rarely cause shock.
I. Soft tissue injuries
A. Skin
Minimal wound debridement.
Cut wounds and lacerations are sutured.
Avulsed flaps are sutured back after ensuring vascularity at the tip.
Local flaps or skin grafts are needed if there are skin defects.
B. Parotid injury
Injury of the duct requires end to end anastomosis over a small silastic catheter using 6/0 nonabsorbable suture. If the injury is at the distal part of the duct, the proximal cut end is sutured to the oral mucosa.
Injury to the gland. The skin is sutured and a small drain is inserted. There will be minor salivary leakage which usually stops in 3 weeks.
C. Eyelid Injuries
Careful suturing of all layers of the lid. Repair of cut levator should be done, otherwise ptosis will result. The tarsus should also be repaired.


Chapter 3: Fluid, Electrolyte and Acid-base Regulation
B. The level of care should not be allowed to drop during the transfer.
C. The patient requires repeated evaluation as some injuries may present late after the accident, e.g., some injuries of the spleen, retroperitoneal duodenal injuries, and subdural haematoma.
The fives of major trauma:
POINTS TO REMEMBER
At the end of the major survey, detect or exclude the following five serious problems: Airway obstruction.
Pneumothorax, open or tension
Massive haemothorax
Flail chest
Cardiac tamponade
When you face a patient with severe bleeding, remember the five areas of potentially severe bleeding:
Chest Abdomen
Pelvis
Long bone fractures
External bleeding
The five causes of upper airway obstruction:
Tongue
Blood
Loose teeth or denture
Vomitus
Soft tissue edema
Five main features of respiratory distress:
Tachyponea and/or dyspnoea
Use of accessory muscles of respiration
Difficult speaking
Low oxygen saturation at bedside oximetry e.g., 80% Agitation or confusion
In analysing the causes of death in major trauma, 3 interrelated factors (hypothermia, coagulopathyand metabolic acidosis) make a vicious circle leading to a potentially fatal outcome: Hypothermia; leadsto slowing of the clotting factors and coagulopathy. Warming of the patient by a favourable external temperature, blankets or the use of warm i.v. fluids is essential. Coagulopathy in turn leads to diminished tissue perfusion, exaggeration of the shock state and metabolic acidosis due to anaerobic metabolism.

D. Ear Injuries
Full thickness tears are sutured by cutaneous perichondral sutures. Haematomas should be evacuated otherwise cauliflower ear will result.
E. Nasal Injuries
Nostril tears should be sutured carefully in three layers (Mucosa, cartilage, skin). Septal haematoma should be evacuated to avoid septal cartilage resorption that ends in a saddle nose deformity.
F. Lips
These should be sutured in 3 layers with respect to the anatomical landmarks.
G. Animal and human bites
These are usually heavily contaminated. Treatment consists of prompt excision, antibiotics and rabies vaccination for animal bites. The wound is left open or loosely sutured with proper antibiotic coverage.
II.Fractures of facial bones
These fractures may be closed or open.
A. Mandibular fractures
Site
Fractures may occur in the symphysis, body, angle, ramus, condyles, coronoid or alveolar process.
Fractures of the body are the commonest and usually occur close to the mental foramen, where the bone is weakened by the marked curvature and by the deep canine socket. In bilateral cases, the digastric and geniohyoid muscles pull the chin fragment and the attached tongue backwards, impairing the airway. Fractures of the angle are minimally displaced as they are splinted by the masseter and the pterygoid muscles.



Clinical features:
Symptoms
Pain, especially on attempts to open the mouth.
Blood-stained saliva. Fractures of the mandible are usually compound into the
mouth because the mucoperiosteum is firmly attached to the bone.
Impairment of speech and swallowing.
Sometimes there is anaesthesia of the lower lip.
Signs
Swelling and haematoma in the floor of mouth.
Local tenderness.
Crepitus.
Irregularity of the line of teeth (Fig. 20.8).
Fig. 20.8: Irregularity of teeth line.
Fig. 20.9: Mandibular fracture on a panoramic view.
Investigations
Plain X-ray is diagnostic. A panoramic view shows the whole mandible (Fig. 20.9). CT may be needed.
Treatment
1) First-aid treatment. The jaw is supported with 4-tailed bandage and analgesics are prescribed for pain. Antibiotics and mouth hygiene are important to prevent infection.
2) Reduction and fixation. If there is displacement, reduction is done under anaesthesia. Fixation (for 3-6 weeks) is done by either:


Chapter 20: Face, Lips and Palate
a. Closed reduction and fixation by arch bars or inter-dental wiring. In the
latter, the patient's jaws are wired together (Fig. 20.10) and a liquid diet
is given. This technique is appropriate for the majority of lower jaw fractures.
b. Open reduction and internal fixation by plate and screws. More
complicated fractures require open reduction through an incision and internal fixation of bone ends by double plates and screws (Fig. 20.11). This technique spares the patient wiring of the jaws.
Fig. 20.10: Fixation of mandibular fracture with inter-dental wiring.
B. Fractures of the maxilla
Fig. 20.11: Fixation of mandibular fracture with plate and screws.
■ Clinical features. There is pain, excess salivation, mal-occlusion, epistaxis, diplopia, swelling, and crepitation. The deformity can be visualized by X-ray or CT scan (Fig. 20.12).
■ Classification
Le Fort classified maxillary fractures into three types (Fig. 20.13).
Le Fort I. This is a transverse fracture above the level of the teeth.
Le Fort II. This is a pyramidal fracture, traversing the base of the nose through the posterior wall of maxillary antrum and across the orbit.
Le Fort III. There is craniofacial disjunction, i.e., separation of the facial bones from their cranial attachment.

Fig. 20.12: CT scan showing a depressed fracture of left maxilla.
Fig. 20.13: Le Fort classification.
bado
A. Fractures of the nose:
Clinical features. There is pain, swelling, epistaxis, crepitus. Plain X-ray is diagnostic.
■ Treatment is by digital or instrumental manipulation to reduce the fracture. The position is then fixed by intranasal packing for 3 days with an external splint for 7-12 days.
B. Fractures of the zygoma
Clinical features include pain, swelling of eyelids, flat cheek, numbness of the cheek and upper teeth due to injury of the infraorbital nerve, and crepitus with irregular infraorbital margin. Sometimes the patient cannot open his mouth because the fractured zygoma impinges on the coronoid process of the mandible.
C. Blowout fractures
These are depressed fractures of the orbital floor with herniation of some of the orbital contents into the maxillary sinus due to sudden increase in the intraorbital pressure.
Clinical features. The patient complains of diplopia and limited up and down gaze, with or without enophthalmos.


III.Temporomandibular dislocation
Aetiology
Direct blows.
Yawning.
Wide opening of the mouth under anaesthesia. This is commonly bilateral and affects middle aged females.
Clinical features. There is pain and dysarthria. The mouth is held open with fixed jaws. In unilateral cases, the chin is deviated to the opposite side.
Treatment. Reduction is better under anaesthesia) by downward traction on the molars with the padded thumb, with upward rotation of the body with the outside fingers.
20.4 Infections of the face
Boils or carbuncles can develop in the face. The area of the face between the lines passing from the outer canthus to the angle of the mouth is called the "dangerous area" because infection in this area is liable to cause cavernous sinus thrombosis (Fig. 20.14).
■ Spread of infection to the cavemous sinus occurs through
Fig. 20.14: Dangerous area of the face.
the ophthalmic veins or through the pterygoid plexus, then emissary veins that traverse the skull base.
20.5 Lip cancer
Epithelioma (squamous cell carcinoma) is the commonest lip malignancy (chapter 12).
Aetiology
Prolonged exposure to ultraviolet rays of the sun.
146


Treatment
Surgery is rarely necessary for this disorder. Torticollis is treated with active range of motion exercises. The child's shoulders are held flat to a table and the head is tilted and rotated in a full range of motion. This procedure should be performed at least four times a day, usually for 2-3 months.
If the muscle continues to become progressively shortened, with facial and occipital skull deformity, both heads of the stermocleidomastoid muscle should be divided through a small transverse incision just above the clavicle.
24.3 Neck injuries
■ Neck injuries may be penetrating or non- penetrating. Penetrating injuries are much more common. They may be caused by gunshots or stabs. Blunt injuries usually occur secondary to road traffic accidents and may cause fracture of the spine.
The most commonly injured structures are
Neck injuries are serious because
The neck contains vital viscera and vessels.
Unstable cervical spine fractures and dislocations can cause paraplegia, quadriplegia, or immediate death. Neck injuries are commonly associated with head, face, and chest injuries.
the big vessels, spinal cord and the aerodigestive tract in that order. Types according to structures injured:
Vascular injuries present by
o Hemorrhage which may be severe enough to cause shock.
o Expanding hematoma.
o Injury to a large vein may lead to pulmonary embolism.
Neurological injuries
o Fracture of the cervical spine may lead to quadriplegia or paraplegia.
o Injury of the brachial plexus or cranial nerves.
Injuries of the larynx or trachea may present by respiratory obstruction, aphonia,
hoarseness of voice, subcutaneous emphysema, air bubbling through the wound or hemoptysis.



Chapter 24: The Neck
Esophageal injuries will be followed by leakage and sevre infection in the neck which may spread to the mediastinum.
■ Investigations:
Plain X-ray may reveal foreign bodies, wide mediastinum, subcutaneous emphysema or fractures.
Duplex ultrasound may reveal injury to the big vessels.
CT of the skull and brain.
CT angiography.
Laryngoscopy and bronchoscopy for laryngotracheal injuries.
Gastrografin swallow for esophageal injuries.
Treatment
ABCDE of trauma must be followed
o Airway management especially endotracheal intubation can be both difficult and dangerous. It must be done by the most experienced personnel.
o Cricothyroidotmy may be easier and safer than tracheostomy.
o Trendelenburg position helps to avoid air embolism in major venous injuries. o I.V. lines should be avoided in the side of trauma.
Tension pneumothorax is managed by inserting a needle in the second intercostal space.
Minor external bleeding can be managed by local compression. Major bleeding needs exploration to stop the bleeding and perform vascular repair.
In case of neurologic damage, neck support and evaluation of the patient initially according to the Glasgow coma scale then by CT and/or MRI to define the exact neurological lesion.
Esohageal injury if discovered early is treated by immediate exploration and repair. Laryngotracheal injuries require surgical repair.
24.4 Cellulitis of the neck
Cellulitis of the neck is either superficial or deep to its deep fascia.


