31.1
Surgical anatomy
31.2
31.3
31.4
31.5
Surgical physiology
Studies of the liver Liver trauma
Infections of the liver
31.6
Liver cysts
31.7
Liver cirrhosis
31.8
Portal hypertension
31.9
Liver tumours
CHAPTER 31
THE LIVER
31.1 Surgical anatomy
The largest solid organ in the body is the liver. It weighs 1200- 1800-gm in adults.
Position
■ The liver is a wedge-shaped organ which fills the right side of the upper part of abdominal cavity and it extends into epigastric region and occupies part of the left hypochondrium.
Description and relations
■ The liver has two surfaces, parietal, and visceral that is separated inferiorly by a sharp lower border.
Parietal surface
The parietal surface is related, in its most part, to the diaphragm, and to a lesser extent to the anterior abdominal wall.
The diaphragm separates this surface from the pleural cavities, lungs, heart, and lower right ribs.
■ The inferior vena cava (IVC) indents its posterior aspect.
The parietal surface is covered by peritoneum, except for a small bare area to the right of the vena cava sulcus, and at the attachments of the peritoneal ligaments.



Chapter 31: Liver
The falciform ligament is a peritoneal fold that connects the parietal surface of the liver to the diaphragm and anterior abdominal wall. It contains the round ligament (ligamentum teres) in its lower free border.
High up at the dome of the liver, the falciform ligament is continuous to the left with the left triangular ligament, and to the right with the coronary ligament and then the right triangular ligament.
Visceral surface
Telegram: @AUData_bot
Hepatic a.
CBD
Portal v.
Fig. 31.1: Structures in the free border of lesser omentum
The left part of the visceral surface is related to the abdominal oesophagus, and anterior surface of the stomach.
Further to the right, the gall bladder is adherent to the under surface of the liver in what is called the gall bladder fossa.
The part of the liver between the round ligament and this fossa is called the quadrate lobe.
The quadrate lobe and the gall bladder are related to the first and second parts of the duodenum, and to the right (hepatic) flexure of the colon.
The right part of the visceral surface bears the renal impression which is caused by the right kidney and suprarenal gland. The peritoneal space between the right kidney and the right lobe of the liver is called the hepatorenal (or Morisons) pouch, and is the most dependent part in the peritoneal cavity in the recumbent position.
Lesser Omentum:
The lesser omentum is formed of a fold of peritoneum that has a free right border, and connects the lesser curvature of the stomach with the visceral surface of the liver. The free border of the lesser omentum contains three important tubular structures (Fig. 31.1)
A. The common bile duct in an anterior plane and to the right.



Telegram: @AUData_bot
B. The hepatic artery in the same anterior plane but to the left of the duct. C. The portal vein posterior to the other two structures.
As they approach the liver, these three tubes divide into right and left branches each
and then enter the hilum of the liver which is known as the porta hepatis.
■ The caudate lobe of the liver is just behind the porta hepatis.
■ The aditus to the lesser sac (foramen of Winslow) is bounded anteriorly by the free
border of the lesser omentum, superiorly by the caudate lobe, posteriorly by the IVC, and interiorly by the first part of the duodenum.
Blood supply and venous drainage
Hepatic artery from coeliac trunk.
Portal vein is formed by union of superior mesenteric
and splenic veins behind the neck of pancreas.
Three hepatic veins (Fig. 31.2) that drain into IVC.
o Right hepatic vein ends directly in IVC.
o Left and middle hepatic veins unite to form a short
trunk before joining IVC.
Lymphatic drainage
Rt hepatic vein.
Lt hepatic /vein
Middle hepatic vein
Fig. 31.2: Hepatic veins
■ The lymphatics of the liver drain into lymph nodes at the porta hepatis and eventually to the coeliac lymph nodes. Some lymphatic vessels pierce the diaphragm and empty in the thoracic duct in the thorax.
Liver divisions (Hepatic lobes):
Classic anatomy of hepatic lobes: the liver seems to be divided into a large right lobe and a small left lobe by the falciform ligament on the parietal surface, and by the ligamentum teres and venosum on its visceral surface.
Surgical anatomy of hepatic lobes: the liver is divided into two almost equal lobes by the middle hepatic vein. This plane of division is projected on the surface of the liver by an imaginary line (called Cantlie's line)) which extends from the fundus of the gall bladder to IVC. (Fig. 31.3). Each of the two lobes of the liver is supplied by a separate branch of the hepatic artery and the portal vein, and its bile is drained by a


Telegram: @AUData_bot separate bile duct. The hepatic venous outflow is drained by three hepatic veins. The
middle one drains blood from both sides, while the right and left veins drain the corresponding liver lobes.
Thus, it seems that, the body has two livers that are grossly united, but can be surgically separated and any of them can be excised without interference with the other.
Sectors and segments (Fig. 31.4)
The hepatic veins and their tributaries divide the lobe into sectors, and the sectors into smaller segments. Each of these segments has its own smaller branch of bile duct, hepatic artery, and portal vein.
There are four sectors divided into eight segments, and any of them can be excised if its duct and vessels are ligated and divided.
The liver segments are numbered from one to eight. Segment one is the caudate lobe that has a special status as it is supplied by hepatic artery and portal vein branches from both sides, and is drained directly by multiple small veins into the inferior vena
cava.
Falciform ligament
Cantle's line
Pute that
Fig. 31.3: Plains of division of the liver Fig. 31.4: Segmental anatomy of the liver
Microscopic Anatomy
■ The liver is covered by the Glisson's capsule, which sends a sleeve extension around the structures in the porta hepatis as they pass inside the liver. This sleeve of connective tissue continues to surround the branches of these structures, even the


31.2
Telegram: @AUData_bot
smallest ones, and forms the portal tracts which appear on histological sections between the hepatic lobules.
Each portal tract contains a small branch of the hepatic artery, portal vein, and bile duct.
The hepatic lobules are formed of sheets of hepatocytes separated by sinusoids, with a central tributary of a hepatic vein.
Blood passes from the portal tract in the periphery to the sinusoids and then to the central vein. Reticuloendothelial cells of Kupffer are scattered along the sinusoids. Bile is secreted by the hepatocytes and is collected by small canaliculi that deliver it to the branch of bile duct that lies in the portal tract.
Surgical physiology
■The liver is a very busy organ, and it therefore, receives 1.5 L of blood per minute. The portal vein supplies two thirds while the hepatic artery supplies one third of this amount. Because of its higher oxygen content, the hepatic artery supplies 50% of the oxygen requirements.
Liver Functions:
1) Metabolic functions:
The liver performs several metabolic processes such as uptake, synthesis, conjugation, oxidation-reduction, excretion and other functions. These processes involve the following substances:
A. Nutrients:
a) Glucose homeostasis (glycogen storage and lysis)
b) Protein synthesis: albumin-fibrinogen-prothrombin c) Fat: Synthesis of several compounds such as:
-
Cholesterol: precursor for steroid hormones, bile acids, and vitamin D.
Phospholipids: phosphate+2 fatty acids (major component of cell membrane)


-
-
-
Telegram: @AUData_bot
Triglycerides: combination of 3 fatty acids (the major compound for energy storage).
Unilamellar vesicles: Phospholipids + cholesterol
Micelle: amphiphilic molecules formed by combination of Unilamellar vesicles+ bile salt to keep vesicles (containing cholesterol) water soluble. This process is mainly formed in gall bladder after concentration of bile
25 folds to prevent precipitation of cholesterol.
B. Bile salts: are synthetized by the liver by combining bile acids with amino acids
and inorganic salts.
- Bile acids are formed from cholesterol.
-
Amino acids: glycine and taurine.
Inorganic salts: sodium and potassium.
Bile salts are excreted via the biliary tree and 90% are reabsorbed in the terminal
ileum to reach the liver again to be re-excreted vie the enterohepatic circulation around 10 times /day.
Functions of bile salts include:
a) Cholesterol metabolism (main route of cholesterol elimination from the body).
b) Choleretic effect which helps elimination of certain catabolites (including bilirubin).
c) Emulsifying fat particles and fat-soluble vitamins to enable their absorption. d) Stimulate intestinal motility.
e) Hinder growth of bacteria flora found in the small intestine and biliary tract. C. Bile pigments:
The liver is responsible for bilirubin uptake, conjugation and excretion via the biliary tree. In the proximal colon, bacteria deconjugate the majority of bilirubin to urobilinogen. 80% of urobilinogen is oxidized by colonic bacteria to stercobilin then excreted with stool giving it its brown colour.
o The rest of urobilinogen is reabsorbed into the portal circulation, then most of it escapes to the systemic circulation to be oxidized to urobilin by the kidney and excreted in urine.



2) Detoxication and degradation of: drugs - ammonia - hormones (estrogen-thyroxin-
cortisone).
3) Storage:
a) Vitamins (A- B12)
b) Minerals (iron-calcium)
c) Glycogen which constitutes 5% of liver weight.
4) Reticuloendothelial cells: remove bacteria and particulate matter from portal
circulation.
Regenerative hyperplasia:
The liver cells have a remarkable capacity for regeneration by hyperplasia when a part of it is damaged by disease or is surgically resected.
This ability is greatly diminished in cirrhotic livers. Surgical resection of a part of a cirrhotic liver carries a bad prognosis because of the diminished capacity of regeneration, and because of the poor function of the remaining part.
31.3 Studies of the liver:
Laboratory investigations:
1) Liver function tests (Table 31.1)
Table 31.1: Liver function tests
Test
Tests which assess the synthetic functions of the liver
⚫ Serum albumin
Prothrombin time (PT)
Tests which assess the excretory functions of the liver
Alkaline phosphatase
Gamma-glutamyl transferase
Tests which denote liver cell injury
Serum aspirate aminotransferase (AST)
Serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) Gamma-glutamyl transferase
Total bilirubin
Direct bilirubin
Normal range
35-50 gm/L
10-15 seconds
30-110 IU/L
10-50 IU/L
5-40 IU/L
5-40 IU/L 10-50 IU/L
0.3-1.2 mg/100 ml
0.3 mg/100 ml


Chapter 31: Liver
Telegram: @AUData_bot
N.B. Alkaline phosphatase may also be raised in bony or intestinal disorders. Serum bilirubin total and direct is a test of the synthetic and excretory functions
2) Tests for viral markers :(hepatitis A, B, C, D and E)
3) Tumour markers: Alpha fetoprotein.
Imaging of the liver
■ Ultrasonography: is the first-choice imaging investigation of the liver because it is simple, non-invasive, reliable, not expensive, and is easily repeated. It is particularly useful for detecting focal lesions as well as hepatosteatosis, fibrosis and cirrhosis. It also allows for guided biopsy. On the other hand, US probe can be applied directly on liver surface during operative intervention to enable better assessment. CT scan (multislice & triphasic) and dynamic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) visualize the parenchyma and adjacent tissues with great clarity to assess:
o State of liver parenchyma.
o Focal lesions: Presence, invasiveness, vascular pattern.
o State of regional lymph nodes.
PET scanning: To assess tumour local, regional and systemic spread (tumour staging) Arteriography is now losing popularity in favor of the previously mentioned non- invasive techniques. It is useful in the diagnosis and management of liver tumours. Isotope scanning of the liver was previously in common use to detect space occupying lesions of the liver. It has been nearly replaced by ultrasonography or CT
scan.
Liver biopsy
Indications
o Target biopsy of focal lesions that are suspected to be primary or secondary tumours is sometimes indicated. Hemangiomas and hydatid cysts should not be biopsied.


Chapter 31: Liver Telegram: @AUData_bot
o Liver transplant assessment. A preoperative histological diagnosis is essential, and the technique can also help in the early detection of postoperative transplant rejection.
Contraindications Bleeding diathesis/spillage of contents (in case of hydatid). ■ Techniques
The standard method is the percutaneous technique. To reduce bleeding, the prothrombin time should not be prolonged more than 3 seconds above the control value, and the platelet count should be above 80000/uL. Even so, it is safer to cross match two units of blood to be ready in case of bleeding. The procedure is done under local anesthesia, usually through the right midaxillary line just below the upper limit of liver dullness. The commonly used needles are the aspiration (Menghini) and the cutting (Tru-cut) types. To biopsy a focal lesion, passage of the needle is guided by ultrasound or CT scan.
o Laparoscopic biopsy.
o Liver biopsy at laparotomy. In diffuse liver disease it is customary to obtain a deep wedge biopsy from the lower border of the right and the left lobes. An intraoperative needle biopsy from the depth of liver substance further increases the diagnostic accuracy.
31.4
Liver trauma
The liver is the second common solid abdominal organ to be injured. It is preceded only by the spleen.
■ Liver injuries are commonly associated with affection of other intra or extra-abdominal organs. The ribs, pleura, lungs, colon and spleen are common associations.
The prognosis after treatment of liver injury largely depends on these associated injuries.
Aetiology:
Accidental trauma that is either blunt as in road traffic accidents (RTA), or penetrating as with stabs and bullets. The damage inflicted by the latter is directly proportionate to


Liver 
its velocity, so the most harmful are the high velocity missiles of rifles as they shatter the liver substance. ■ Iatrogenic injury is increasing with the rising popularity of invasive investigations as percutaneous liver biopsy, and percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography (PTC). ■ Spontaneous rupture of the liver is an extreme rarity that may happen with eclampsia or hepatic tumours. 
Pathology: ■ Type of injury o Haematoma: • Subcapsular / parenchymal. • Contained/uncontained. o Parenchymal tear: • Superficial (Fig. 31.5). • Deep (usually involve major vascular branches). • Shattered liver (Fig. 31.6). o Vascular injury is the most serious owing to difficult access to control especially injuries involving the main hepatic veins and IVC. 

Fig. 31.5: Superficial tear of the right lobe of the liver 
Fig. 31.6: Shattered liver (Post mortem). Patient died from severe haemorrha!e 
■ Consequences: o The main danger of such injuries is bleeding, and this should be the main concern 


A liver haematoma sometimes communicates with a torn bile duct allowing blood to trickle down the biliary passages to gastrointestinal tract producing what is known haemobilia. 
Remember: • Liver injury can be associated with affection of other organs, inside and outside the abdomen. • Prognosis of liver injury depends largely on the presence of associated injuries. • Priorities of trauma management (Chapter 2). • Chest stabs as high as the 4thintercostal space can transfix the diaphragm and injure the liver (and I or the spleen). 
Clinical features: • Liver injuries draw attention to their presence because of intraperitoneal haemorrhage. o History of trauma. o Abdominal pain. o Abdominal tenderness and rigidity are caused by parietal peritoneal irritation, either by blood or escaping gastrointestinal secretions. o The presence of lower rib fractures raises the suspicion of liver affection. o Massive bleeding presents with the picture of Haemorrhagic shock. Minor bleeding is discovered by diagnostic peritoneal lavage (DPL), ultrasound or by CT scan (Fig. 31.7), which are done in suspected cases. These tests are particularly useful in the unconscious patient as it is difficult to assess the abdomen. o The injury may also be discovered with systematic exploration during laparotomy for penetrating abdominal trauma. 
0011". 0 • .411111111k,_ Stt• 
Fig. 31.7: CT of Liver laceration 
Investigations: 
• Laboratory: anaemia, leucocytosis, elevated ALT&AST, acidosis, coagulopathy. • Imaging: ❑ US may show free intraabdominal fluid (blood). 


❑ CT scan: o Only done after hemodynamic stability is resumed. o Can show associated injuries (chest, abdomen). o Can show detailed pattern of liver injury (liver injury scale). 
Treatment: 
■ All cases should be well resuscitated and stabilized, then they can be submitted either to conservative or operative management. A. Indications of conservative management: ❑ Hemodynamic stability. ❑ Isolated liver injury. ❑ Contained (non-expanding) and small (less than10 cm) hematoma. ❑ Absent peritoneal irritation. ❑ Viable parenchyma (enhanced in CECT). Principles of conservative management include: o Maintain hemodynamic stability. o Antibiotics. o Follow up US and CT. 
B. Indications of operative management: ❑ Hemodynamic instability. ❑ Associated injury of other organs. ❑ Expanding or large hematoma. ❑ Signs of peritoneal irritation. ❑ Non-viable parenchyma (non-enhanced in CECT). Principles of operative management: o Approach: bilateral subcostal (rooftop) incision provides excellent exposure for isolated liver injuries. Midline vertical incision is more suitable for multiple organ injuries. o Prinele's maneuver: Temporary occlusion of hepatic artery and portal vein to reduce inflow to the liver can reduce active bleeding and help better control 


to ter : Aver 
the offending vessels. This can be achieved by applying compression on the hepato-duodenal ligament either manually or better by a vascular (non-crushing) clamp. The safe ischemia time that can be tolerated by the liver is about 10-15 minutes. (Fig. 31. 8). o Operative steps: Thorough systematic exploration of the abdomen is required to assess the liver affection and to detect other intra-abdominal injuries. a) Treatment of liver laceration: - Minor laceration without active bleeding: no intervention. Major deep laceration with active bleeding: control bleeding vessels by clips, sutures or packing the laceration with pedicled omentum flap fixed by tie over sutures. (Fig. 31.9). 
--- '1 % • . IV 1 t . Vkl L.*. " ...7. Fig. 31.8: Pringle's manoeuvre Fig. 31.9: Pedicled omental flap 
b) Treatment of liver hematoma: It should be evacuated to detect and control underling bleeding vessels c) Treatment of pulped devitalized liver parenchyma: Debridement/ anatomical resection. d) Treatment of untidy injury in unstable patient: Gauze packing for 24-48 hours. Correction of anaemia, coagulopathy, hypothermia, fluids, electrolytes and PH imbalances. - Re-exploration after stabilization. e) E- Treatment of cases of retro-hepatic injury of main hepatic veins or IVC: - Median stemotomy can be added to enable exposure. 


at Per operative infusion of large volume of blood using infusion pump. Release of all hepatic attachment to enable adequate liver retraction. Exclusion of retro-hepatic segment of the NC using either intra-caval shunt or clamping of the NC with extracorporeal veno-venous bypass (femoral vein to internal jugular vein). This can be done for 45 minutes. f) Multiple intraperitoneal drains are always placed to guard against collections of blood and bile. Prophylactic antibiotics are prescribed. • The mortality of liver injury averages 15-20%. Especially if other major organs are injured. 
31.5 Infections  of the liver 
The following are the liver infections with surgical interest • Viral hepatitis (see chapter 7). ■ Pyogenic liver abscess. ■ Amoebic hepatitis and abscess. ■ Hydatid disease of the liver. ■ Hepatic Schistosomiasis. 
Pyogenic Liver Abscess ■ This is a serious highly fatal disease. The key to improving the results of its treatment is an early diagnosis. The development of modem diagnostic and interventional radiology, together with the evolution of antibiotics, contributed to a safer management of the problem. ■ Aetiology ❑ Sources of infection o Binary tract (cholangitic abscess): This is the commonest of all sources. Ascending cholangitis caused by bile duct obstruction results in multiple abscesses of the liver. The likely organism is E. coli or other gram-negative bacilli. 

